readme.md, before:


# 🧠 Articles by Nikhil Mhatre

Welcome to **Articles**, a curated collection of hands-on, code-driven write-ups on topics I’m learning, exploring, or building in the world of **Data Engineering**, **Machine Learning**, and **Computer Science**.

This repository serves as the **main entry point** for anyone looking to read, learn, or experiment with the concepts I’ve documented — all backed by clean code and simple explanations.

---

## 🎯 Purpose

The goal of this repository is to:

* Share **conceptual deep-dives** in a practical way
* Document my **learning journey** in public
* Provide **clean, runnable code** alongside each article
* Create a reference space for **interview prep**, **experimentation**, and **portfolio showcase**

---

## 📂 Repository Structure

Each topic or article lives in its **own subdirectory**, containing:

* A blog-style `README.md` explaining the concept
* Python code (`main.py`, notebooks, etc.) that demonstrates the idea
* A `test.py` file with unit tests wherever applicable
* Future expansion: diagrams, Jupyter notebooks, or visual demos

```
Articles/
│
├── TextVectorization/
│   ├── main.py
│   ├── test.py
│   ├── readme.md  ← 📘 blog-style explanation
│   └── __pycache__/
│
├── AnotherTopic/           ← Coming soon
│   ├── main.py
│   ├── readme.md
│   └── test.py
│
└── README.md               ← You are here
```

---

## 📚 Published Articles

| Topic                                      | Description                                                                                                                                          |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [`TextVectorization`](./TextVectorization) | Learn how to represent sentences as vectors and compute similarity using pure Python (no libraries). Ideal for beginners exploring NLP fundamentals. |
| *(More coming soon)*                       | Stay tuned for articles on TF-IDF, Word2Vec, distributed systems concepts, and more.                                                                 |

---

## 🚀 How to Use This Repo

### 🧭 To Read

Navigate into any subfolder and read the `readme.md` — each one is written like a standalone article or blog post.

### ⚙️ To Run Code

All code is designed to be minimal and runnable:

```bash
cd TextVectorization
python main.py       # runs vectorization + similarity logic
python test.py       # runs unit tests
```

---

## 🧱 Philosophy

This repo isn’t just a code dump — it’s a **thinking space**, built to help:

* Me reinforce concepts through writing and coding
* Others get started with clean, real-world examples
* Showcase my understanding and teaching ability to the community and recruiters

---

## 👨‍💻 About Me

**Nikhil Mhatre**
🔧 Data Engineer | 📊 Systems Thinker | 🧠 Lifelong Learner
📎 [Portfolio](https://mhatrenikhil36.github.io/me/
) • [GitHub](https://github.com/MhatreNikhil36) • [LinkedIn](https://linkedin.com/in/nikhil-nandkumar-mhatre)

---

## 🤝 Contributions

Not currently open to external contributions — but feel free to fork, adapt, or share feedback.

If you’re learning something from this repo, let me know — I’d love to connect!

Commit message:

added article on cummulative joins for scd type2

readme.md, after:


# 🧠 Articles by Nikhil Mhatre

Welcome to **Articles**, a curated collection of hands-on, code-driven write-ups on topics I’m learning, exploring, or building in the world of **Data Engineering**, **Machine Learning**, and **Computer Science**.

This repository serves as the **main entry point** for anyone looking to read, learn, or experiment with the concepts I’ve documented — all backed by clean code and simple explanations.

---

## 🎯 Purpose

The goal of this repository is to:

* Share **conceptual deep-dives** in a practical way
* Document my **learning journey** in public
* Provide **clean, runnable code** alongside each article
* Create a reference space for **interview prep**, **experimentation**, and **portfolio showcase**

---

## 📂 Repository Structure

Each topic or article lives in its **own subdirectory**, containing:

* A blog-style `README.md` explaining the concept
* Python code (`main.py`, notebooks, etc.) that demonstrates the idea
* A `test.py` file with unit tests wherever applicable
* Future expansion: diagrams, Jupyter notebooks, or visual demos

```
Articles/
│
├── TextVectorization/
│   ├── main.py
│   ├── test.py
│   ├── readme.md  ← 📘 blog-style explanation
│
├── SCD2_CumulativeJoin/
│   ├── readme.md  ← 📘 SQL-based article on SCD Type 2
│
└── README.md               ← You are here

```

---


## 📚 Published Articles

| Topic                                               | Description                                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [`TextVectorization`](./TextVectorization)          | Learn how to represent sentences as vectors and compute similarity using pure Python (no libraries). Ideal for beginners exploring NLP fundamentals.         |
| [`SCD2_CumulativeJoin`](./SCD2_CumulativeJoin)      | Implement Slowly Changing Dimension Type 2 using SQL joins on daily snapshots. Includes detailed examples for PostgreSQL-compatible SQL workflows.          |
| *(More coming soon)*                                | Stay tuned for articles on TF-IDF, Word2Vec, distributed systems concepts, and more.                                                                        |

---

## 🚀 How to Use This Repo

### 🧭 To Read

Navigate into any subfolder and read the `readme.md` — each one is written like a standalone article or blog post.

### ⚙️ To Run Code

All code is designed to be minimal and runnable:

```bash
cd TextVectorization
python main.py       # runs vectorization + similarity logic
python test.py       # runs unit tests
```

---

## 🧱 Philosophy

This repo isn’t just a code dump — it’s a **thinking space**, built to help:

* Me reinforce concepts through writing and coding
* Others get started with clean, real-world examples

---

## 👨‍💻 About Me

**Nikhil Mhatre**
🔧 Data Engineer | 📊 Systems Thinker | 🧠 Lifelong Learner
📎 [Portfolio](https://mhatrenikhil36.github.io/me/
) • [GitHub](https://github.com/MhatreNikhil36) • [LinkedIn](https://linkedin.com/in/nikhil-nandkumar-mhatre)

---

## 🤝 Contributions

Not currently open to external contributions — but feel free to fork, adapt, or share feedback.

If you’re learning something from this repo, let me know — I’d love to connect!
